RFC: add `Tool.outputSchema` and `CallToolResult.structuredContent` (#371)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/specification/draft/server/tools.mdx

}
```

### Output Schema

The optional `outputSchema` property provides a JSON Schema that describes the expected structure of the `structuredContent` property of a CallToolResult.

> When a tool specifies an `outputSchema`:
> 
> 1. Clients **MUST** validate that the tool result contains a `structuredContent` field whose contents validate against the declared `outputSchema`.

Reviewer: Is it absolutely required for clients to validate the contents of the `structuredContent` field?

If the same entity is supplying both the schema and the output, isn't it reasonable to assume that they match?  Putting it another way: if the output is untrusted, wouldn't the schema be untrusted too?

```suggestion
When a tool specifies an `outputSchema`:

1. Clients **MUST** validate that the tool result contains a `structuredContent` field. Clients **MAY** validate that the contents of the `structuredContent` field conforms to the declared `outputSchema`.
```

Author: They key is that the client can examine the tool's outputSchema before deciding to use it, then validate output against the schema after each call - it sets up a binding contract, so to speak, rather than just being a hint.

> 2. Servers **MUST** provide tool results that conform to their declared `outputSchema`s.

Reviewer 2: It would be helpful to provide some guidelines on how the server should respond when validation of the output against the schema fails. 
For example `InvalidParams` is used in https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/typescript-sdk/pull/454/files
or recommend server authors to pick a custom error code.

Author: I guess I'm not sure we'd need to make an error path explicit for this situation - this was more just a restatement of the contract, since (in the absence of upstream errors returned in the usual way) the server should be able to guarantee that results conform to the declared schema. But definitely LMK if you have a specific situation in mind that I'm not thinking of!

Example tool with output schema:

```json
{
  "name": "search_database",
  "description": "Search a database for records",
  "inputSchema": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "query": {
        "type": "string",
        "description": "Search query"
      }
    },
    "required": ["query"]
  },
  "outputSchema": {
    "type": "array",
    "items": {
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "id": { "type": "string" },
        "title": { "type": "string" },
        "url": { "type": "string" }
      },
      "required": ["id", "title"]
    }
  }
}
```

Example valid response for this tool:

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 5,
  "result": {

>     "structuredContent": {

Reviewer 3: Now that we have a separate key for structuredContent, wouldn't it be preferable for its value to directly conform to the outputSchema rather than having a type and a serialized json? At the very least should we avoid serialization?

}
```

> ### Output Schema

Reviewer 3: Should we explicitly have some b/w compat recommendations based on the MCP version string header i.e. if the client is on an older version, we return the json serialized text in a content text block?

Author: My feeling was that we should avoid being overly proscriptive/fine-grained about logic based on client versioning, but adding a suggestion about serialized JSON in a text block is a great idea. Thanks!

Tools that produce structured results can use the `outputSchema` property to provide a JSON Schema describing the expected structure of their output. 

When a tool specifies an `outputSchema`:

1. Clients **MUST** validate that results from that tool contain a `structuredContent` field whose contents validate against the declared `outputSchema`.

2. Servers **MUST** provide structured results in `structuredContent` that conform to the declared `outputSchema` of the tool.

<Info>

> For backwards compatibility, a tool that declares an `outputSchema` may also return unstructured results in the `content` field.

Reviewer 3: Can we update this to mention that this should be based on the MCP client version string rather than doing this unconditionally.

Author: Seems useful to avoid mandating complex version-dependent logic here. (Paraphrasing offline discussion with @ihrpr:) In practice the SDKs will be handling construction of actual results, so it's useful to leave some freedom, and client/server devs will be spared the implementation details in any case. But even if both formats are sent unconditionally, the perf impact isn't huge, definitely not worth baking complexity into the spec to avoid.

Reviewer 4: Why does it say "for backwards compatibility"? Does that mean structured output is always preferable over unstructured output? Why not specifically encourage tools to return both an unstructured and a structured response, so that the MCP client can pick the desired one based on the use case? For example, an unstructured response can be optimized for an LLM to read (e.g. when chatting with Claude), and a structured result can be used when further transformations are required.

Furthermore, you might also want to allow structured results contain extra data like IDs or timestamps that are not very meaningful for an LLM, but can be useful when doing data transformations (This also contradicts the bullet points below).

              "direction": { "type": "string" }
            },
            "required": ["speed", "direction"]
          }
        },
        "required": ["temperature", "humidity", "conditions", "wind"]
      },
      "forecast": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "date": { "type": "string", "format": "date" },
            "high": { "type": "number" },
            "low": { "type": "number" },
            "conditions": { "type": "string" }
          },
          "required": ["date", "high", "low", "conditions"]
        }
      },
      "location": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "city": { "type": "string" },
          "country": { "type": "string" },
          "coordinates": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
              "latitude": { "type": "number" },
              "longitude": { "type": "number" }
            },
            "required": ["latitude", "longitude"]
          }
        },
        "required": ["city", "country", "coordinates"]
      }
    },
    "required": ["current", "forecast", "location"]
  }
}
```

> Example valid response for this tool:

Reviewer 3: Can we also add an example for a valid response that is b/w comaptible?
